This is Debra Beale and I am interviewing Dr.
Richard Thomas on the history of the Texas
Engineering Experiment Station. The date is June
15th, 1984. ...section on here already, so tell us
who you are. I'd like to
put some background on your education and how you
came down here. Well, I wouldn't say how far back in
it. You talked about university education in
Richmond. I did all my work up at Ohio State,
finished, or left there rather, in 64. My
background is basically aerospace engineering,
that's where my PhD is, but also studied
mathematics and math too. But I was brought into
the Department of Aerospace Engineering here
back in 1964. You were gone for a few years, right?
Yeah, I made the mistake of leaving Texas A&M at one
time. I was offered a job as a department head at
Maryland and left and went up there. My
family and I discovered that some hard-bitten old
Midwestern conservatives didn't fit well into
the heartland of the liberal eastern
establishment. And... And it was really
principally Washington. It wasn't the
University of Maryland. I enjoyed the university
and had a great time there. But it was just the
general mood and environment of Washington, D.C.
itself that we didn't fit into. And so after we were
there a couple of years, I determined that I had
made a mistake and
taken the family there and decided to go
elsewhere. And I actually was pursuing some jobs
in some other areas. And I thought, well, I would
contact Fred Benson, who was dean here. And he was
kind enough to offer me an opportunity to come back
to Texas A&M. And so we did come back then in the
early 70s. That was a right move, incidentally.
When you first came here, what type of research was
going on? Well, that's a very relevant question
regarding the history and general impact of TEAS.
Because
within the Aero Department, there wasn't any
research
going on. Mr. Rutter was our president then. He
recognized that research was key to the image of an
institution that aspired to greatness. But
any of the so-called... Great universities,
their reputation is built more on their research
than on their academic programs. In my view, the
undergraduate program at MIT, for example, is
rather pedestrian. And I just assumed if I had a
student who wanted to study... A son who wanted to
study aerospace engineering, I'd just...
Frankly, I'd rather have him here than MIT. And
when you get into graduate work, that's something
else again. It's a different story. But it is
research that... That
makes the image of an institution. I
once heard that Mr. Rutter had said, I don't know
whether it's true or not, that he was going to make
Texas A&M the MIT of the Southwest, or I guess that
would also mean possibly make MIT the Texas A&M of
the Northeast or something, although they'd have
to go a bit to do that. But
it was clear that when I was hired here in 64, they
didn't ask whether I could teach or not. They were
interested in the fact that I had been involved in a
very active research program, and above all, I
knew how to hustle money and
convince sponsors that they ought to give me money
for research. There wasn't any... It was...
That's what I was supposed to do. Because, as I say,
when I came into the aerial department, as I
recall,
there was not anyone at that
time. Now, they had had some off and on, but there
wasn't any... There wasn't any large, consistent
program. You did mostly aeronautical research
versus aerospace, too. Well, it wasn't even...
No, I don't make any distinction there. Oh, okay.
Yeah. Now, shortly after I came here, there was
another group within AERO and coupled with ME that
had a piece of research dealing with propeller
thrust studies.
And I'm sure they would have gotten that,
had...
That was the directive that was given to
me. And... But did it change much between the time
you came and... No. No. It hasn't
changed all that much today. Now, the structure
has changed a bit. It was what it is now and what it
was then.
And this gets into some of the personnel changes
that were in since 64.
I cannot... I cannot overemphasize the
importance of TEA. In that whole process. And as a
matter of fact, the importance of TEA's in my
decision to come to Texas A&M. And
if you want to get into that now, we can. But it
wasn't absolutely critical. Because quite
frankly, I think if there hadn't been TEA's, I
wouldn't have come to Texas A&M. It's that simple.
And
I well remember
what a very positive reaction that I had after
my interview. Because I thought, these people
know how it's done. And the positive reaction came
largely from two men. Al Kronk, who was then the
head of the Aerospace Department. And above all,
Harry Whitmore. Who had just come in, I think, in
what, 63, I think? Just a year before to head up the
Space Technology Division, so-called. Now, I'm
going to say some... Make some comments here that
would appear to be critical of Al Kronk. But they
should not be interpreted that way. He was, and
still is, although he's in poor health now, a hell
of a guy. And I really came to love that man.
However, Al was like so many of our engineering
department heads back in those days. In that he was
not research-oriented. He did not promote
research. He did not push faculty to do research.
Texas A&M's image back in the 50s, I think,
although it's not here. But I think it was one of the
super undergraduate educational institutions.
And in the engineering, it turned out people that
were very well equipped to go into industry. And do
the job. But as I say, when Mr. Rutter came aboard in
about 58, I guess, as chancellor, I think, or
president. I'm not really sure how that all
happened. But he was the one who really started to
promote research activities at Texas A&M. Well,
we had, as I say, we had a number of engineering
department heads. Cliff Semang in mechanical
engineering. Bob Whiting in petroleum
engineering. And on and on. Burgess in industrial
engineering. Great guys. Super teachers. Super
educators. But researchers,
quite honestly, it was always my perception.
Nobody ever told me this. But it was always my
perception that the space technology division
and Mr. Whitmore were set up. To, well, one might
say to go around Al Kronk. And I suppose, you know,
that wouldn't be too far off base. But really it was
more to supplement what was Kronk, what Professor
Kronk was doing in the educational arena. And get a
very definite research thrust going. To
me, when I came down here in the spring of 64, TEAS
had money to spend in the promotion of research.
And above all, they knew what that meant. This had
just a tremendous impact on it. Because I was, I had
determined, although I looked at industry when I
decided to leave Ohio State. I had determined I was
going to stay in the academic world. I
went over, well, among the institutions that I
interviewed was Georgia Tech. And they had a
pretty good research program. But I was
absolutely turned off by their attitude. They
wanted me to promote research. They wanted me to
hustle money. And I said to them, well, do you have
money to travel, you know, to go visit research
funds? And they said, well, you can take that out of
your research money. I said, wait a minute. You
can't, you know, you're asking me to pull myself up
by my boot straps. You've got to prime the pump a bit
here, you know. And it was clear they weren't all
that willing to do that. But Mr. Whitmore and TEAS.
Were willing. And he understood. And keep in mind,
of course, not a lot of that credit goes to Fred
Benson. Because he understands, too, what is
involved in building a program. And it's
something that you just don't do overnight. So
they understood that in the promotion of
research, one does not sit down and write out a
proposal. However technically excellent it
might be. And send it to the sponsor, the potential
sponsor. And say, send money by return made. It
just does not happen that way. You must go there.
You must sell yourself. You
have to hustle. And that, to some, is sort of the
senior side of academia. But you've got to do it.
And there's just no substitute for having support
of that type. And
I think that, and having the Research Foundation.
Of course, it was a great thing. Of course, it was a
great asset, too. Because there you could get a
professional-looking proposal turned out.
Obviously, they, coupled with TEAS, would help
you manage your project, your money, once you got
it. And that's essential. Because when I went,
again, just to illustrate. When I went to the
University of Maryland. Again, I went into a
department, if you can believe this, 20 minutes
from downtown Washington. Where many of the
research sponsors were located. And again, when I
went to Maryland, that department had not paid
anyone a research. And
they did not have a research foundation. They did
not have a research foundation. And I lucked out
and rather quickly got a nice grant from NASA to do
some wind tunnel studies. And I had to hire a gal
into the department office there to keep books on
this project. You know, the very sorts of things
that the Research Foundation and TEAS do for you.
Well, that kind of support, you see, is just
inestimable value in the promotion of research.
And
so all of that infrastructure was here. And of
course, Ohio State had had a very strong research
foundation. Their engineering experiment
station was nothing
like this. So I had some appreciation of what these
support institutions could do for you. And that
was all here. And that was all in place. And to have
that, you see, coupled with Mr. Whitmore's
attitude. You know, yeah, I got some money for you.
You need help. You come see me. And it was just too
good to pass up. Of course, you know, I'd have to say
that there were some other factors. And I
liked the attitude of the people.
But in terms
of Dick Thomas' professional development, I
don't think I could have found, and frankly, I tell
young people today, I don't think they could find
today any better atmosphere. Although the
teaching loans, of course, have increased
substantially in recent years. And that's, I
know, a very negative factor in recruiting
people. But in terms of promoting research, it's
difficult to find a better atmosphere. They have
to find a better environment, a better atmosphere
in which to do that. So T's contributed heavily, I
think, to the elevation of Texas A&M's image as a
research institution. We've still got a ways to
go. But when you look, when you consider about 26
years since Mr. Rutter took over and set us on this
path, if you look back at what we've accomplished
in those 25 years, it's really quite incredible.
It really is. A lot of people don't appreciate
that. But T's contributed heavily to that. When
you first came, was the wind tunnel still housing
hay? Was it still what? Was it still a hay barn?
Well, not quite. Almost.
They know where to start. My, that brings back a lot
of memories.
The wind tunnel was there and had recently, that
is, I say recently, but I think, I'm not sure when it
was, I think in the late 50s and early 60s, had been
upgraded. Because initially it was an open
circuit or an open throat type wind tunnel. And
that, you just have difficulty doing precise
research in a facility like that. And so they had
put in the, they had closed it, they had put in the
return leg. And Joe Bruce and his crew had a
magnificent job of ferreting out sources of
turbulence and instability in the tunnel. And
they had put in the balance to measure forces on
models. And,
but it had kind of fallen on hard times because I
think, although they had put in the balance, they
did not put in a data system. A system that would
more or less automatically, excuse me,
automatically
process the data coming out of the balance and out
of the wind tunnel. And I don't know whether that
was, well, there was another problem too. I should
back up here a bit and say, as you've probably
already been told,
it was hoped that by upgrading the tunnel could do,
it could support itself with commercial testing
for like LTD and general dynamics and others. And
it also, of course, it would provide a basis for
some good aerodynamic research. Well, at about
that time, for whatever reason,
building its own wind tunnel facilities and other
organizations did too. And I think that, coupled
with the fact that we weren't really wind tunnel
data,
it just led to the circumstance that occurred when
I came in, and that was that the wind tunnel had been
shut down basically. We were just sitting there
gathering dust. And so, to that extent, it was, I
think,
I remember one of the first groups of students that
I had. The first courses I taught dealt with
low-speed aerodynamics. And so, I went across
and used the wind tunnel for some student
demonstrations.
And so, I took a bunch of students out there, and
down in the basement of the tunnel, we found a big
box that looked rather like a coffin. But in that
box, we found a model, a wind tunnel model. And it
had been, it was a,
that's the T in LTV.
Temco, back, I don't know, back in the 50s, was
preparing a bid on the, development and
production of a cargo airplane for the Air Force or
something. And they had this model. And
apparently, they were unsuccessful in their bid.
And then, of course, were then absorbed by, and
apparently never took the model back. And so, the
traditional Aggie enthusiasm, my students tore
into that thing. They assembled the model. We
installed it in the wind tunnel with Mr. Bruce's
invaluable assistance. And we ran a series of
tests on that model. And again, this was just
principally for the educational.
But we sort of blew the dust out of the tunnel at that
time. And I guess it was through that experience
that I
became convinced that it was a fine facility.
Excellent flow characteristics.
And I thought it, you know, I thought it was
possible to do some research. And although that,
it was out of my area. I mean, I was trained
principally in hypersonic aerodynamics
and not in M number.
But I learned to fly during World War II. And I still
enjoy flying. And so, you know, to that extent,
because of the airplanes I fly, they'll go. And I,
we
were fortunate then in the mid-60s to get some work
for NASA. From NASA. For work in the wind tunnel.
But here again, you see, this, I well remember a
trip that I took to NASA Langley after having done
what ground work I could do by phone. And I went up
there and talked to a guy who eventually became a
very good friend, Mr. Jerry Rainey. And
essentially convinced him that he ought to give
some money to Texas A&M. And he did. And you see, if
I'd been at Georgia Tech, for example, or some
other institution that didn't have that support
for you, it would have just been impossible. And
there was another element to that, incidentally,
thinking back on it. The aero department has a
small wind tunnel, a two foot by three foot, I think
it is. Yeah, I've seen that. That's not anywhere
near the same wind tunnel. Right. Okay. However.
We were doing some work on dust generator. We were
proposing for Langley to do some work on dust
generation. And we built a little prototype of our
dust generator and put it in that tunnel, in that
small tunnel, to prove the concept. And that
construction of that little prototype was done
with key's money. And I'm sure that when I went to
see Mr. Rainey at Langley and I showed him, I said,
you know, here we did a little, very crude
improvisation of what we wanted to do in the big
tunnel. And
he was impressed with that. And so here, this is
just the way, just the way T's work, you see, the T's
money works. Just absolutely invaluable. When
you came back in 1971, did you become involved in
the shuttle research? In what? Shuttle research?
No. No. No. What were you doing? When I, you see, in
1970 or, well, 69, when Neil Armstrong set foot on
the moon, the space program started downhill. And
also, for the first time in history, all three of
the support areas generally active in aerospace
engineering went downhill. And that's because
aerospace engineering in the 60's and so forth,
70's, rested on a three legged stool. One is
commercial and general aviation. Another one is
military aviation and the third is space. And
generally, in times past, those things would not
be synchronized. That is, if one went down, one of
the other would be going up and things were
relatively balanced. In the 60's and early 70's,
for the first time in history, they all three went
down together. It was not a good time for an
aerospace engineer to be out looking for a job.
Research
money had dried
up. The student enrollments went down in the early
70's because engineers couldn't get jobs.
The department over here had more faculty than it
needed. Norton
and others will tell you, Jim Strickland, when he
was in the lot. They were urged to go out and hustle
the research money in order to keep themselves
afloat financially. Because they just, I think by
1973 or 4, I think the total number of graduates out
of the department is something like 20. They
get dried up and hurt. And so, when I came back, Mr.
Benson put me in a position as a special assistant
to him. Uh. And so, after that, I was able to take the
job. And so, that was really off the task of simply
promoting some new research for the 14's and for
the College of Engineering. And
I did not, as a matter of fact, my title at that time,
my academic title was professor of engineering,
professor of aerospace engineering. And so, it
was only later on when the enrollments came back
that I got to say, no,
not anything to do a test.
Prior to those tests, we did get the wind tunnel
back in operation, and we had a going facility. And
then, of course, NASA came in and bought us a data
system, bought us a computer to do the processing,
and that's the kind of a facility we should have had
back in the early 60s. Did they have those types of
things developed in the early 60s? Yeah, they were
mostly analog computers. But, yeah,
they had facilities
that made it. And that was the big problem.
You see, when a guy runs a wind tunnel test, he wants
the results right now. Because, of course,
oftentimes, if you look at the data, the way that
looks and his interpretation of that, that will
determine what the next test is going to be. Well,
you see, the setup they had in the late 50s and early
60s was such that . . . . . . they could take data in a
very raw form, and they had to bring it into the DPC,
punch it into CARMS, and then process it the next
day. You know, the sponsors . . .
When you came back as the assistant, were other
departments besides aerospace having . . . Were
they what? Were other departments having trouble
getting research money, too? Was there a slope in
any of the others? Oh, no, dear, I don't think I'd
say that.
Incidentally, we're skipping over some other
things here that occurred in the late 60s that
would involve TEAS, and I guess we ought to come
back and talk about those. Because, you see, we
haven't talked about the flight lab, we haven't
talked about the shock tube, both of which
resulted
totally from what TEAS did.
But to answer your question, no, there . . . . . . in
the 60s and 70s,
there was a general push toward the hiring of
faculty that had research capability. And so,
just as I had been hired into AERO to . . . and had
been successful in hiring other people in other
departments. And so, I think Texas A&M was moving
on a fairly broad front
in research. Now, these were mainly in what you
might call the traditional.
And so, when I came back,
I had a . . . before I came back, I had a conversation
with . . . a conversation I'll never forget. And he .
. . and incidentally, I was not an assistant dean. I
was a special assistant to the dean. And so, it was
purely a research. It had no academic . . . and I
didn't work with . . . But
Mr. Benson,
a lot
of
people think that he's a staid
outreach. Because
. . . and here again, this was . . . this was a kind of a
typical TEAS operation. He just simply wanted me
to find some new areas in which . . . in which TEAS and
the college of engineering could work.
Non-traditional
areas. And as far as he was concerned,
I had carte blanche to move in any direction I
wanted. It was as if he had given me a little chunk of
money, which he did. And said, in effect, here, go
do something great with this. And it was
absolutely one of the most exhilarating
experiences . . . I've ever had in my life. He . . . and
he just ran some things by me, you know, the way he
was thinking. He said that . . . he thought that . . .
Of course, keep in mind, we were in the midst of the
Vietnam debacle at that time. He said, you know,
for the first time in history, our technology has
failed us. But he suggested that . . . that we might
do a piece of research . . . looking at why
technology failed . . . or if technology had . . . and
if it had, why it had. That . . . and I nosed into it a
little bit to find out that . . . at that point, there
was so much stonewalling going on. Of course, you
had . . . you'd have to have access to classified
data. So, we didn't pursue that. He was very
concerned about advanced transportation
systems. And that kind of surprised me, because,
of course, he had been the founder of TTO. But he was
concerned . . . he was concerned that TTI was not
reaching out far enough. And they were too content
to sit here doing highway research. I mean, good
stuff. Don't misunderstand. Good stuff. But . . .
But research that was, again, pretty traditional
stuff. And at that time, there was great interest
in some of these people-mover systems . . . and
old things like the air trans up at Dallas . . . the
DFW airport . . . you know, unmanned, automated . . .
kinds of systems.
And he thought we ought to be getting into that. And
so, we did mount some efforts in that. The
whole issue of productivity and to use new
technology
. . . to increase the efficiency of manufacturing
and production . . . is still, of course, very, very
hot to Mr. Benson . . . that he saw that coming down
the road.
So, as I say, he just
wanted me to sort of follow my nose . . . and try to
develop some new research areas for the . . . That
was my assignment when I came here. You said
productivity developed into being here. What
group was it that was doing this? Well, there
wasn't any group doing it at the time. Yeah, when
you said . . . And
so, the . . . well, the people that we drew on . . . to
folks out of industrial engineering . . . there
were some other folks in ME and EE . . . that put the
involvement principle . . . came out of industrial
engineering. But the thrust of that, as it turned
out, was . . . well, I guess there were two things.
One major thrust dealt with technology transfer.
That has a different connotation today than it did
then. Those words nowadays, when you say
technology transfer . . . generally talk . . .
people are talking about . . . the movement of
technology from the U.S. to the Soviet Union . . .
and a vital question. But back in those days . . . it
had to do with what might better be called . . . the
diffusion of technology. That is to say, one of the
things we studied . . . dealt with numerically
controlled machines. These are machine tools . . .
Lays, milling machines, and so forth . . . that
early on were controlled by . . . what you might call
a very crude computer. It was a numerical system . .
. an automated system . . . based on punched paper
tapes . . . paper tape with holes in it . . . that
contained signals that would guide the machine.
And so, instead of having a machinist sit there . . .
with his eye twisting the knobs very carefully . . .
and so forth . . . it was all automated. If you went up
to General Dynamics . . . for example, and bought . .
. aerospace manufacturers, for example . . . you'd
find lots of NC machines. You'd go to Hughes Tool . .
. or Cameron Ironworks . . . or some of the smaller
machine shops . . . that populated Houston
. . . which indicated that, for some reason or other
. . . that technology had not diffused . . . had not
moved through American industry. And the belief
was, quite properly . . . that if we could do that . . .
if we could somehow stimulate that . . . that we
could help industry increase its productivity . .
. become more efficient . . . become more
competitive with Japan and Germany. So, that was
the general idea . . . that it headed much toward the
. . . Was
there a particular center? No.
No. It never evolved into that. We just simply
called it the Productivity Program. And
we had a problem emerge there . . . quite honestly,
that we still have today. And
this is . . . I guess here I'm going . . . I'm about to
utter my first critical remark . . . of Tease.
The kinds of work that I . . . was attempting to
promote there . . . as I've already indicated . . .
was interdisciplinary. That is to say, we needed
to get . . . industrial, mechanical, and
electrical engineers. The reward system as it is
set up now . . . and Tease has been part of this . . . is
one wherein a department head . . . and a faculty
member . . . is credited . . . literally credited . . .
with the money he brings to his department. And . . .
if a guy . . . let's suppose that a program . . . is
focused in some external center . . . in this
center, for example . . . we still have this
problem. If I get a half million dollars . . . to do a
piece of research . . . and I go to mechanical
engineering . . . and electrical engineering . . .
and any engineering . . . simply
because the work is attractive . . . I get, say,
three million dollars . . . one from each one of
those departments . . . to work with me on the
project . . . they don't get any credit for that. And
a portion . . . although they would deserve . . . the
department would be . . . would deserve credit . . .
for a portion of that money . . . that I've gotten . . .
because I got the money . . . based on the
capabilities . . . that exist over there in the city
. . . but the way the reward structure is set up . . . it
doesn't address that. And so that's a . . . that's a
real severe problem . . . that, as I say, exists . . .
and tease
about this . . . and they nod
every time . . . I complain . . .
so what . . . the productivity program . . . that
when
I got some money . . . we got some money . . . from the
National Science Foundation . . . industrial
engineering . . . took their little chunk of money .
. . and went back to industrial engineering . . . and
did their little thing . . . and they said to hell . . .
with these other guys . . . and I was just . . . I was
just . . . absolutely unable . . . to bring any kind . .
. of an interdisciplinary . . . and
so . . . there's a real problem there . . . that
somehow . . . someway we have to . . . it's not a . . .
it's not an easy thing . . . and Texas A&M and TEAS . . .
is not the only one . . . that has that problem . . .
it's a universal problem . . . but the . . . the
productivity . . .